Skylyte – design statement
Scott Beale
I had thought you had asked for a fairly moderately lengthed description of my design process, but there 
was some confusion. So in the case that you wanted a shorter description, I’ve included a TL;DR version 
here. If you DID want the longer one, please skip this.

########################################
The initial design direction for my interactive fiction stemmed from my thoughts about Zork and Book & 
Volume. Some of the devices they used were rewarding and entertaining while others were frustrating 
and confusing. 
Zork portrayed an environment fun to explore, but often displayed that space in a strange way to 
represent twisting passages and the like, but I don’t think it worked well to a textually. Book & volume 
utilized a grid based system. This was much less frustrating, but made the space fee especially artificial. I 
wanted my IF to be entertaining to explore like Zork, but remain comprehensible, like B&V. I decided on 
a locale suiting the medium: an abandoned, subterranean research-facility. This sort of environment 
translates well to Inform’s “room”-based organization of space, while still enabling engaging 
exploration. The setting is fairly typical, but I think that is because this sort of space works. Other 
settings might have been more creative, but I eschewed creativity for creativity’s sake to play to the 
strengths of the medium.
Amnesia is trope of the genre, but it is so because it puts the character in the same degree of knowledge 
as the player. Although the character in my IF does not have amnesia, I did not want to ‘remove’ the 
player from the character. I felt that Zork’s lack of detail of the protagonist was a benefit. The character 
WAS the player, rather than in B&V where the character was CONTROLLED BY the player.  And so I do 
not elaborate on whom the player is or why they are where they are, (besides the method by which they 
got there).
I felt Zork was lacking in narrative. The spaces and encounters in Zork seemed to lack much cohesion 
(purpose). My goal was to create a narratively purposed space, that was also fun to explore. I sought to 
enable the player as they explore the space to also be able to explore the *narrative* of the space. 
Instead of a narrative where things ‘happen’, I tied my narrative to a space where something HAS 
happened. In Skylyte, something dark has occurred and it is up to the player to fit the pieces together. 
Clues dot the environment but are often extraneous to the actual completion of the game. Discovery is 
left in the hands of the player.
To drive the exploration of the space, I chose a series of challenging but comprehensible puzzles.In 
Skylyte, although the solution to a puzzle is not always immediately apparent, I made an effort to make 
the general objective clear. When you come across a locked door, you know you must find a way to 
unlock it. 
Additionally, I intentionally avoided features that I have found detracted 
from an IF game, including time, combat, and--most notably--death. 
There is no way for the player to die or to reach a condition that forces him 
to restart; only the puzzles stand in the way.

To be honest, I did not find the peer critique to be very helpful. I had already completed most of the 
game at that point and in the ten minutes available to me I only had time to go over the general design 
principles and feel of my game, none of which my peer group had anything to point out to improve. 
They liked the concept and my reasons for not including death, as well as why I chose the setting I did. If 
we had had time to let them actually play through the game I’m sure I would have gotten better 
feedback but it was hard for them to comment without specifics.
#########################################################


The initial design direction for my interactive fiction stemmed from my thoughts about what I liked and 
what I disliked about the other interactive fictions that I played. Certain devices that both Zork and Book 
& Volume used were rewarding and entertaining while others were frustrating and confusing. 
As a textually based platform, interactive fictions cannot visually depict the space they represent, which 
is the primary way people are used to understanding space.  Zork portrayed a varied and interesting 
environment that was a joy to explore, but was frequently guilty of “displaying” that space in a way that 
felt exceedingly eratic. For example, in one location a player might go west, then south, then east, and 
end up in his original location, or in several places, go in one direction and then return the opposite way 
only to end up in a different place. While this was utilized to represent twisting passages and the like, I 
do not think it translates well to a textually based space. Book & volume went the opposite direction, 
with the primary space of the game occurring in a collection of regularly placed city blocks ordered in a 
grid. This was much easier and less frustrating to explore than Zork, but a side effect of this predictable 
organization of “rooms” was that the space felt especially artificial—like the rooms were mere 
‘containers’ rather than actual representations of space. 

With these thoughts in mind, I decided to set my interactive fiction in a locale that suits the medium: an 
abandoned, subterranean research-facility. This allows me to constrain the player to an indoor, man-
made environment in a believable way that does not break immersion. This sort of environment 
translates well to Inform’s “room”-based organization of space, as well as its directional system of 
movement through it. While this setting is fairly typical of the genre, I think the reason for this is not 
mere tradition—it’s because it works. Other settings might have been more creative, but I don’t feel 
creativity for creativity’s sake is worth hindering the player’s ability to understand the space being 
portrayed. Additionally, my environment gives an easily communicated goal—escape to the outside I 
believe is more compelling than an arbitrarily defined objective, or the promise of some unusable 
reward.

Amnesia is trope of the genre, but it is so because it provides a sort of tabula rasa for the player to insert 
himself into. A character with amnesia exists as though he has no past, putting the character in the same 
degree of knowledge as the player, thus avoiding the need to come up with devices to explain 
information to the player that the character would already know. Although the character in my IF does 
not have amnesia, I also wanted to avoid those storytelling devices, because I believe they separate the 
player from immersion in the game. Interactive fiction relies on, and benefits heavily from, a player’s 
imagination, enabling the player to really sink into the metaphorical shoes of their character. I felt that 
Zork’s complete lack of exploration of the protagonist was a benefit. The character WAS the player 
rather than in Book & Volume where the character was CONTROLLED BY the player.  And so, like in Zork, 
I do not elaborate on whom the player is or why they are where they are, (besides the method by which 
they got there), leaving that to the player to decide. 

In Skylyte, the character falls (literally) into an environment just as alien to the character as to the 
player. Exploration of this environment is what drives the narrative of my fiction. I enjoyed exploration 
in Zork but felt it was lacking in narrative. The spaces and encounters in Zork seemed to lack much 
cohesion. (Why is there a troll here? What is the purpose of this underground environment?) In order to 
avoid this, I took care to create a space that was believable and immersive, but was also fun to explore. 
This focus on exploration tied directly to how I chose to express my narrative. Instead of creating an 
active narrative that is communicated to the player, I tied my narrative to the space. Just as the players 
explore the world that surrounds them, they explore a narrative of events that have already passed. The 
way I did this bears similarities to many designs of the Penumbra series of survival/puzzle horror games 
(Although my first iteration of this project was completed before I played the series.)   The first game, in 
particular, I would guess was heavily inspired by interactive fiction games and is very reminiscent of the 
feel of them. While the follow up games had superior mechanics, the first one remains my favorite 
because of the way it expresses its narrative. Ironically, one aspect of the original Penumbra’s commonly 
critiqued is its “weak” story.  Certainly less *happened* in the original game, but instead of calling the 
story weak, I would characterize it as minimalist—out of the way. Like in Skylyte, something dark has 
happened in Peneumbra, and it is up to the player to fit the pieces together. Clues dot the environment, 
often extraneous to the actual completion of the game, but necessary to discover the events that 
unfolded beforehand. Beyond the establishing sequences, no breaks in immersion occur to force 
background information on the player—discovery is left in the hands of the player, and this is what 
makes the narrative truly explore-able.  However, the full picture is never truly revealed, and some of 
the mystery is left to the player to fill in.

While exploration of space and narrative describes the overarching experience I wished to impart, I 
chose to drive this exploration by presenting a series of obstacles the player must surmount. The 
presence of interactive conflict of some sort, in my mind defines what makes a game. Without it you are 
left with simulation. Avoiding death and defeating/killing opponents is an easy way to add conflict to a 
game, but I do not think it suits the interactive fiction medium. Death or “losing” in interactive fiction 
breaks immersion.  Unless the consequence of death bars the player from reattempting the game, it 
merely becomes an arbitrary punishment. Without the display of skill as a method to avoid this 
punishment, the punishment must necessarily occur as a consequence of the player exploring his 
options, which is contrary to the explorative strengths of the interactive fiction medium. Similarly, I 
dispensed with time-based  and resource consumption mechanics, such as lanterns running out of fuel. 
In order for this sort of design to serve any purpose, it must punish the player for making the ‘wrong’ 
choices for decisions that the player must not always know the answer to. 

For the conflict in Skylyte, I chose to stick to a series of challenging, but comprehensible puzzles.  I 
enjoyed many of the puzzles in Zork, but much of the time I was a presented with a puzzle, I was at a 
complete loss not just to *how* I was supposed to complete it, but also to *what* exactly I was 
supposed to be doing. In Skylyte, although the solution to a puzzle is not always immeadietly apparent, I 
made an effort to make the general objective clear. When you come across a locked door, you know you 
must find a way to unlock it. When you come across a darkened room, you know you must find a way to 
light it. Coinciding with this decision is the way I handle objects. The objects you can pick up in the game 
have an obvious purpose or value, even if you have not encountered the corresponding puzzle it relates 
to. In this way the player is not forced to meta-game. There are no random old boots it would be 
advisable to pick up because it is likely some sort of boot-eating monster exists later in the game. 

My primary design objective was to create a space that was interesting and rewarding to navigate. I 
sought to create an immersive experience that allowed players to explore a mysterious and somewhat 
dark setting that remained believable. I made use of the strengths of the Interactive Fiction format in 
describing space by designing the spatial connectivity of the environment to be easy to comprehend 
textually. I forwent description of the character or his/her history in order to allow the player to explore 
the narrative spatially contained in the environment.  I packed Skylyte with puzzles to drive their 
exploration, but avoided having the player need to make arbitrary decisions to complete these puzzles. 
To be honest, I did not find the peer critique to be very helpful. I had already completed most of the 
game at that point and in the ten minutes available to me I only had time to go over the general design 
principles and feel of my game, none of which my peer group had anything to point out to improve. 
They liked the concept and my reasons for not including death, as well as why I chose the setting I did. If 
we had had time to let them actually play through the game I’m sure I would have gotten better 
feedback but it was hard for them to comment without specifics.
 


